Feature - columnar performance docs (#801)
PowerGridModel/power-grid-model: docs/user_manual/performance-guide.md

# Guidelines for performance enhancement

> The `power-grid-model` is a library that shines in its ability to handle calculations at scale in.

Author: ```suggestion
The `power-grid-model` is a library that shines in its ability to handle calculations at scale.
```

# Guidelines for performance enhancement

The `power-grid-model` is a library that shines in its ability to handle calculations at scale in.
It remains performant, even when doing calculations with one or a combination of the following extremes (non-exhaustive):

- Large grids
- Batch calculations with many scenarios
- Many changes in the grid in each scenario

> - Meshed grids

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
Maybe we should not mention meshed grids specifically as it is not a factor of scale.

> To achieve that high performance, several optimizations to the code are made.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To achieve that high performance, several optimizations are made.
```

> To use those optimizations to their fullest extend, we recommend our users to follow the following guidelines.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To use those optimizations to the fullest, we recommend our users to follow the following guidelines.
```

## Data validity

> Many of our optimizations rely on assuming input data validity and the fact that the provided grid is reasonably close to realistic.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Many of our optimizations rely the input data validity assumption and the fact that the provided grid is reasonably close to realistic.
```
or
```suggestion
Many of our optimizations assume input data validity and rely on the fact that the provided grid is reasonably close to realistic.
```

> Non-convergence, underdetermined equations (sparse matrices) or other unexpected behavior may therefore be encountered when the data is not realistic.

Reviewer 2: What is the reason that you mention `sparse matrices` here specifically under `underdetermined equations`? It's unclear how these two are necessarily related.

Reviewer 3: I think I agree, because even with a well determined set of equations, the resulting matrices are very sparse, right? And that is even the reason why have our own math solvers.

Author: the reason is specifically about the `SparseMatrixError` that's dreaded by many users. This was an attempt to elaborate that. Do you know of a better way to explain that? or should i just remove it entirely?

To keep the PGM performant, checks on hard physical bounds are offloaded to a separate tool, the [data validator](data-validator.md).

> However, these checks are extremely expensive and should therefore not be used in production environments at scale when performance matters.

Reviewer 2: I believe this sentence is wrong in the wording, in production environments ppl also do debugging. Consider:
```suggestion
However, these checks can be prohibitively expensive and application at scale in production environments are therefore not recommended when performance matters.
```

Author: ```suggestion
However, these checks can be prohibitively expensive and application at scale in production environments is therefore not recommended when performance matters.
```

Instead, we recommend using the data validator specifically for debugging purposes.

```{note}
Some combinations of input data are not forbidden by physics, but still pose unrealistic conditions, e.g. a source with a very low short-circuit power.

> These cases may result in unexpected behavior of the calculation core under the optimizations in the code.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
These cases may result in unexpected behavior of the calculation core.
```

> Vagueness and case-dependence make it hard to check what can be considered "unrealistic", and the [data validator](data-validator.md) will therefore not catch such cases.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Vagueness and case-dependence make it hard to check what can be considered "unrealistic", and the [data validator](data-validator.md) will therefore not catch such cases. Most of the limits are bounded only at one end for example, extremes of which can result in unexpected behaviour.
```
How does this sound? The sentence has less consequence, so resolve if you dont agree.

Author: i wouldn't go for this one cause it may distract the reader from the actual goal of this page (performance, not correctness).

Author: slightly improved the note tho

We recommend our users to provide reasonably realistic scenarios to prevent these edge cases from happening.
```

## Data format

The data format of input, output and update data can have a big effect on memory and computational cost.

### Input/update data volume

Row-based data (created, e.g., using {py:class}`power_grid_model.initialize_array` in Python) constructs input/update data with all attributes for a given dataset type.
However, many component attributes are optional.

> If your use case does not depend on these attributes, this means that a lot of data is needlessly created and initialized.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If your use case does not depend on these attributes, a lot of data is needlessly created and initialized.
```

> If you are running on a system on which memory is the bottle-neck, using a columnar data format may reduce the memory burden, at the cost of a slight computational overhead during the calculations.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you are running on a system where memory is the bottle-neck, using a columnar data format may reduce the memory footprint. This may or may not induce a slight computational overhead during calculations.
```

### Output data volume

For most use cases, only certain output values are relevant.

> For instance, if you are only interested in line loading, outputting all other components and attributes results in unnecessary overhead.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For example, if you are only interested in line loading, outputting all other components and attributes results in unnecessary overhead.
```

> The output data may be a significant, if not the dominant, contributor to memory load, particularly when running batch calculations with many scenarios.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The output data may be a significant, if not the dominant, contributor to memory load, particularly when running batch calculations.
```

Reviewer 3: I think _with many scenarios_ should be kept. It is very different to do 10 or 10000 scenarios.

Reviewer 2: Then those numbers should appear. "many scenarios" and "batch calculations" are redundant. Either do "large batch calculations" or "batch calculations with millions of scenarios"

Reviewer 3: _Large batch calculations_ sounds indeed better and removes redundancy.

Author: right.
```suggestion
The output data may be a significant, if not the dominant, contributor to memory load, particularly when running large batch calculations.
```

We therefore recommend restricting the output data to only the components and attributes that are used by the user in such production environments.
In Python, it is possible to do so by using the `output_component_types` keyword argument in the `calculate_*` functions (like {py:class}`power_grid_model.PowerGridModel.calculate_power_flow`)

### Database integration

Most databases store their data in a columnar data format.

> Copying, reserving unused memory and cache misses may cause both unnecessary memory and computational overhead.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Copying, reserving unused memory, and cache misses can lead to unnecessary memory usage and computational overhead.
```

> Integration of the PGM with databases using a columnar data format is therefore often not only easier and more natural, but also more performant.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
With the introduction of columnar data input to PGM, integrating with databases using this format becomes easier, more natural, and more efficient.
```
